# 12.1 Readings & Activities

## Readings

Doudna, J. A. (2020). The promise and challenge of therapeutic genome editing. Nature, 578(7794), 229-236. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-1978-5

Gyngell, C., Bowman-Smart, H., & Savulescu, J. (2019). Moral reasons to edit the human genome: picking up from the Nuffield report. Journal of Medical Ethics, 45(8), 514-523. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/medethics-2018-105084

Eeltink, E., Van der Horst, M. Z., Zinkstok, J. R., Aalfs, C. M., & Luykx, J. J. (2021). Polygenic risk scores for genetic counseling in psychiatry: lessons learned from other fields of medicine. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 121, 119-127. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2020.11.021

Lencz, T., Sabatello, M., Docherty, A., Peterson, R. E., Soda, T., Austin, J., ... & Davis, L. K. (2022). Concerns about the use of polygenic embryo screening for psychiatric and cognitive traits. The Lancet Psychiatry, 9(10), 838-844. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(22)00157-2

## Activities

Identify and discuss themes in a popular source about genetic editing or selection. Find a recent popular source about genetic engineering, editing, or selection. Identify and discuss three themes relevant to the popular source, citing at least one of this week's readings in your discussion of each theme.

1. Report the citation and link to the popular source you will be discussing.
2. Briefly (1-2 sentences) provide an introductory overview of the topic/major points of the popular source.
3. Select three themes in human behavior genetics to discuss with regard to the popular source. For each theme:
- List the theme (you may rephrase for brevity) as the section title
- In 100-200 words, describe whether and how the theme is in agreement or in disagreement with information presented in the popular source.
- Include at least one reference to concepts/ideas from the Perusall readings from this week in your discussion of the relevance of the theme to the popular source topic.

--------

Next: [13.0. Personalized Medicine & Personalized Education](../ch13/13.0_personalized_medicine_and_education.md)

Previous: [12.0. Genetic Engineering](12.0_genetic_engineering.md)

Home: [Table of Contents](../index.md)
