# 1.0 What We Know and What We Don't

Welcome!

This course is arranged with one module per week of the semester (excluding break). The modules will follow a consistent structure:

- Each module will begin with a brief overview of the week (you are here) and links to any additional materials that you should review to prepare for the week.
- Each module will include a list of participation activity assignments. For each module, you may earn credit for up to four assignments. Most weeks there will be more than four options to choose from, but you only receive credit for up to four per module.
- Some module-weeks will include an assignment due date as part of constructing your Course Project.

This first week is of course all about introductions.

Behavior Genetics is a field that is defined by a common set of questions and methods, rather than being focused on any particular topic of study. This week we discuss some of the commonalities, or themes, that recur throughout research across topics, in terms of the questions we ask, what we know, and what we don't (and maybe can't) know.

This week we will:

- Introduce common terminology and themes in behavior genetics.
- Become comfortable with the typical weekly course structure.
- Evaluate and share what knowledge you come to this course with and what you hope to learn.

Next: [1.1. What is Behavior Genetics?](1.1_what_is_behavior_genetics.md)
Previous: [0.4. Acknowledgments](../ch00/0.4_acknowledgments.md)
Home: [Table of Contents](../table_of_contents.md)