# 6.1 Readings & Activities

## Readings

Bai, D., Yip, B. H. K., Windham, G. C., Sourander, A., Francis, R., Yoffe, R., ... & Sandin, S. (2019). Association of genetic and environmental factors with autism in a 5-country cohort. JAMA Psychiatry, 76(10), 1035-1043. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2019.1411

Koi, P. (2021). Genetics on the neurodiversity spectrum: Genetic, phenotypic and endophenotypic continua in autism and ADHD. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part A, 89, 52-62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.shpsa.2021.07.006

## Activities

Summarize either of the readings following the appropriate template, [Empirical](../materials/template_summary_review_source.md) for Bai et al. (2019) or [Review](../materials/template_summary_review_source.md) for Koi (2021).

Find and evaluate a popular source about the genetics of autism. Find a recent popular source reporting on scholarly research about the genetics of autism. From the popular source, identify the scholarly source to which it refers. Identify and evaluate the following:
1. What is the APA-formatted citation to the popular source?
2. What is the APA-formatted citation to the scholarly source?
3. In 3-5 sentences, compare the popular source to the scholarly source. What did the author of the popular source do well? What did they do poorly? What follow-up question did you have after reading/viewing/listening to the popular source? If you could make one suggestion to the author of the popular source, what would it be?

--------

Next: [7.0. Cognitive Ability, Educational Attainment, & Gene-Environment Correlation](../ch07/7.0_cognitive_ability.md)

Previous: [6.0. Autism: Heterogeneity & Disability Perspectives](6.0_autism.md)

Home: [Table of Contents](../index.md)
