# 13.1 Readings & Activities

## Readings

Pirmohamed, M. (2023). Pharmacogenomics: Current status and future perspectives. Nature Reviews Genetics, 1-13. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41576-022-00572-8

Gómez-Carrillo, A., Paquin, V., Dumas, G., & Kirmayer, L. J. (2023). Restoring the missing person to personalized medicine and precision psychiatry. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 17, 1041433. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2023.1041433

Martschenko, D. (2020). DNA dreams: Teacher perspectives on the role and relevance of genetics for education. Research in Education, 107(1), 33-54. https://doi.org/10.1177/0034523719869956

Morris, T. T., Davies, N. M., & Davey Smith, G. (2020). Can education be personalised using pupils’ genetic data?. elife, 9, e49962. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.49962

## Activity

Identify themes in a popular source about personalized medicine or the genetics of education. Find a recent popular source about personalized medicine (such as pharmacogenomics) or the genetics of education. Identify and discuss three themes relevant to the popular source, citing at least one of this week's readings in your discussion of each theme.

1. Report the citation and link to the popular source you will be discussing.
2. Briefly (1-2 sentences) provide an introductory overview of the topic/major points of the popular source.
3. Select three themes in human behavior genetics to discuss with regard to the popular source. For each theme:
- List the theme (you may rephrase for brevity) as the section title
- In 100-200 words, describe whether and how the theme is in agreement or in disagreement with information presented in the popular source.
- Include at least one reference to concepts/ideas from the Perusall readings from this week in your discussion of the relevance of the theme to the popular source topic.

--------

Next: [14.0. Genetics, Society, and Identity](../ch14/14.0_genetics_society_and_identity.md)

Previous: [13.0. Personalized Medicine & Personalized Education](13.0_personalized_medicine_and_education.md)

Home: [Table of Contents](../index.md)
