# 5.1 Readings & Activities

## Readings

Gottesman, I. I., & Gould, T. D. (2003). The endophenotype concept in psychiatry: Etymology and strategic intentions. American Journal of Psychiatry, 160(4), 636-645. https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.160.4.636

Trubetskoy, V., Pardiñas, A. F., Qi, T., Panagiotaropoulou, G., Awasthi, S., Bigdeli, T. B., ... & Lazzeroni, L. C. (2022). Mapping genomic loci implicates genes and synaptic biology in schizophrenia. Nature, 604(7906), 502-508. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-04434-5

## Activities

Summarize either of the readings following the appropriate template, [Review](../materials/template_summary_review_source.md) for Gottesman & Gould (2003) or [Empirical](../materials/template_summary_review_source.md) for Trubetskoy et al. (2022).

Find and evaluate a popular source about the genetics of schizophrenia. Find a recent popular source reporting on scholarly research about the genetics of schizophrenia. From the popular source, identify the scholarly source to which it refers. Identify and evaluate the following:
1. What is the APA-formatted citation to the popular source?
2. What is the APA-formatted citation to the scholarly source?
3. In 3-5 sentences, compare the popular source to the scholarly source. What did the author of the popular source do well? What did they do poorly? What follow-up question did you have after reading/viewing/listening to the popular source? If you could make one suggestion to the author of the popular source, what would it be?

--------

Next: [Autism: Heterogeneity & Disability Perspectives](../ch06/6.0_autism.md)

Previous: [5.0 Schizophrenia: Phenotyping & Process](5.0_schizophrenia.md)

Home: [Table of Contents](../index.md)
