# 7.1 Readings & Activities

## Readings

Haworth, C. M., Wright, M. J., Luciano, M., Martin, N. G., de Geus, E. J., van Beijsterveldt, C. E., ... & Plomin, R. (2010). The heritability of general cognitive ability increases linearly from childhood to young adulthood. Molecular psychiatry, 15(11), 1112-1120. https://doi.org/10.1038/mp.2009.55

Rimfeld, K., Malanchini, M., Packer, A. E., Gidziela, A., Allegrini, A. G., Ayorech, Z., ... & Plomin, R. (2021). The winding roads to adulthood: a twin study. JCPP Advances, 1(4), e12053. https://doi.org/10.1002/jcv2.12053

## Activities

Find and evaluate a popular source about the genetics of cognitive ability/intelligence/IQ. Find a recent popular source reporting on scholarly research about the genetics of Cognitive Ability/Intelligence/IQ. 
1. Report the APA-formatted citation to the popular source.
2. Identify a CENTRAL CLAIM of the popular source. What is a fact or opinion that the source is primary concerned with communicating to the audience? Provide the central claim, either as a quote (if it's short and clear) or by summarizing the central claim in your own words.
3. Identify how the central claim you identified in point 2 relates to material covered so far in this course. Choose among the following three options:
	- AGREE: the central claim is in agreement, either generally or specifically, with material covered so far in this course.
	- DISAGREE: the central claim is in disagreement, either generally or specifically, with material covered so far in this course.
	- NEW: the central claim is new and relatively non-overlapping with material covered so far in this course.
4. If you selected AGREE or DISAGREE for Point 3, describe how the central claim is (or is not) in agreement with course material and cite your source from the course materials. If you selected NEW for Point 3, describe/speculate whether the claim seems like it might be generally in (or not in) agreement based on what you've learned so far, citing at least one source from the course materials to support your guess.

--------

Next: [8.0. Internalizing, Stress, & Gene-Environment Interaction](../ch08/8.0_internalizing.md)

Previous: [7.0. Cognitive Ability, Educational Attainment, & Gene-Environment Correlation](7.0_cognitive_ability.md)

Home: [Table of Contents](../index.md)
